My first journey to Zizang was back in
2011.
My first aerial shoot in Zizang took
place in 2016.
With the implementation of new drone
regulations,
I have witnessed the rise and end of my
aerial photography journey.
It is time to create a definitive film
as a retrospective of this past decade.
This entire project was filmed and
produced independently. Hence, the
perspectives and preferences naturally
carry a personal touch.
Over the next 2 hours,
let us immerse ourselves in the
breathtaking landscapes of Zizang.
The journey begins in Nyingchi, moving
in a clockwise direction,
passing through Shannan, Shigats, Ngari,
Nag, and Chamdo,
before finally returning to Nyingchi to
complete the circle.
And now, we begin.
The whole story starts at our camp. We
are near Zhok Village, right in the
heart of the Yarlung Tsangpo.
It's already our fifth day in the
mountains.
I'm waiting for a clear day because a
clear sky reveals Gyala Peri and Namcha
Barwa
in this isolated place.
There is no satellite signal due to the
heavy clouds,
so I can't make any calls.
I came here following a wildlife
research team.
They are retrieving infrared cameras.
Tomorrow is the sixth day, and I'll be
forced to leave this forest paradise.
This morning, the weather I'd been
wishing for actually cleared up.
I quickly launched the drone for an
aerial shoot.
In the distance lie the peaks of Namcha
Barwa.
Unfortunately,
the main peak is hidden by clouds.
But even without the clouds, Namcha
Barwa isn't particularly spectacular
from this angle.
The most magnificent mountain here is
Gyala Peri.
The Parlung Tsangpo sits at 2,000 m,
while the snowy peaks tower at over
7,000 m.
The drop is so immense that a single
frame just cannot capture it all.
Beneath the sea of clouds is where the
Parlung Tsangpo merges into the Yarlung
Tsangpo.
The tragic part is that just as the
weather turned perfect, I had only one
full battery left. This is a panoramic
photo. I didn't shoot in raw format back
then, so the overexposed snow on the
peaks can't be recovered anymore. Gyala
Peri and Namcha Barwa are the snowy
lighthouses of Nyingchi, the very core
of eastern Zizang.
We will see them again and again in the
chapters ahead.
I brought a total of three drone
batteries.
I used up the first two batteries
yesterday.
That was yesterday when I thought the
clear sky would never come. So, I spent
them filming the great bend of the
Yarlung Tsangpo.
This is Zhag Village, located right at
the great bend of the Yarlung Tsangpo.
Back in 2013,
I took a detour to trek here while
cycling the Sichuan-Tibet Highway, and
that's how my connection with this place
began.
In 2016, I trekked in low for aerial
filming.
At that time, the route followed the
Parlung Tsangpo the whole way,
and you could reach Zha in just one day.
Back then, the entire village had
already been relocated.
Since 2017,
the suspension bridge over the river has
been broken.
You have to change routes and hike over
the mountains to reach Zha,
which takes 3 days. This aerial shoot
was done in 2023.
Let's compare the two aerial shots.
You can see a landslide occurred right
at the Great Bend.
This is where the Parlung Tsangpo merges
with the Yarlung Tsangpo.
100 years ago, a British explorer
arrived at the confluence of these two
rivers.
He was the famous plant hunter, Frank
Kingdon Ward.
In 1924,
Kingdon Ward set off from Paitao and
crossed the Shing Shi La Pass to get
here.
His mission was to investigate whether a
massive waterfall existed in the heart
of the Yarlung Tsangpo Canyon,
and to collect botanical specimens and
seeds.
He later wrote about this expedition in
his book, The Riddle of the Tsangpo
Gorges.
Kingdon Ward published over 20 books in
his lifetime,
exploring many parts of Eastern Xizang,
Western Yunnan, and India.
To this day, there are many routes he
explored in Xizang that I have still not
been able to reach.
When I first heard that a foreigner had
entered the Great Canyon a century ago,
I heard it from the villagers of
Menchong Village, but I didn't believe
them at first.
Kingdon Ward will appear many more times
in this film.
As he explored so many places,
in truth, Kingdon Ward wasn't the first
person to explore the Great Canyon.
Though his predecessors didn't venture
as deep as he did.
The earliest recorded foreigner was Kin
Thub from Sikkim.
He came to Zayul between 1880 and 1884
on a surveying mission.
In what is now Dongju Village in Lulang
Town, he was sold into slavery by his
companion.
He worked as a tailor to survive.
After buying his freedom, he went on to
explore the Great Canyon and Medog.
When he finished, he returned to Sikkim.
30 years later, the Great Canyon saw new
visitors.
In 1930, British military officer
Frederick Bailey, along with surveyors,
explored the Great Canyon.
They entered Medog from the southern
region of Zayul.
However, none of the four people in the
footage managed to reach the core area.
We won't dive too deeply into their
adventure just yet,
as it will be mentioned again later.
According to the latest road conditions
in 2025,
the suspension bridge over the Parlung
Tsangpo has been rebuilt. It now takes
only 1 day to get from Payi Township to
Zhag. Whether a trekking route will be
developed in the future, I don't know.
Somewhere in this aerial shot, hidden
from view down by the Yarlung Tsangpo
River, the research team is retrieving
their infrared cameras.
In recent years, the second Zayul
Plateau scientific expedition has been
in full swing.
I've seen the photos captured by these
infrared cameras, tarkins, leopard cats,
clouded leopards, and more.
Unfortunately, it's highly unlikely to
catch these animals with a drone. The
core area of the Yarlung Tsangpo Canyon
has an incredible ecosystem with
thriving flora and fauna.
But, since it has nothing to do with
aerial photography, we won't dive into
it further.
One thing we should mention is the few
houses on the right side of the screen.
This place is called Menchong Village. I
trekked here in 2013.
It was the friends here who told me that
a British explorer had entered 100 years
ago.
I also learned that the Monpa people of
Menchong originally came from Bhutan.
This migration was later confirmed in
Kingdom Ward's book. By now, some of you
might be wondering whether I managed to
film the Tsangpo Badong Waterfall.
The answer to that question will be
revealed later in the video.
Let's leave the Great Canyon behind for
a moment.
We head back to Bomi. This is Kangmu
Village in Bomi County along National
Highway 3. My first journey to Zizang
was back in 2011, traveling in a hard
seat train.
The young man sitting next to me was
very familiar with Zizang.
I still remember his general appearance
to this day.
At the time, I asked him where in Zizang
I could find a place like that. You
know, where there's snow up on the
mountains, but the grass down below is
still green.
Growing up in northern China, I was used
to distinct seasons.
It's hard to see snow and green grass in
the same frame. I think the same goes
for most people living at low altitudes.
That's why I have this deep fascination
with such scenery.
That young man told me that Nyingchi has
exactly that kind of landscape.
Back in Bomi, there's a scenic spot
called the Gang Cloud Spruce Forest.
On the way there, you pass through a
village called Gangmai.
This village is incredibly beautiful in
spring and summer.
Over the years, I've been to Bomi many
times.
Let me give you a quick overview of
Bomi's weather.
Bomi gets a lot of rain and snow in the
spring, so clear days are quite rare.
But, once it clears up, it looks exactly
like a painting.
Moving into July and August, the
highland barley turns golden, and the
snow on the mountains melts.
At this time, the scenery along Highway
318 isn't great, but the high-altitude
mountains are breathtaking.
In high-altitude areas, like around
Galongla, all kinds of rare alpine
flowers start to bloom. As winter sets
in, clear days increase, making it the
perfect time to admire the snow-capped
mountains.
Inside the Gang Cloud Spruce Forest,
there is a grass lake. When the rainy
season arrives, the Parlung Tsangpo
River swells and flows backwards into
it. This creates a unique sight of a
river within a lake. It's a fantastic
spot for kayaking.
Opposite Gangmai Village lie the ruins
of the Galden Palace,
which used to be the administrative
center of Bomi.
Because Bomi was cut off by surrounding
mountains, it remained independent for a
long time and saw its fair share of
wars. When Bailey arrived in Bomi in
1913,
the administrative center had already
moved to what is now Zuwaqha Village. In
1930, the king of Bomi was defeated by
the Kashag government.
After his defeat, the king of Bomi took
his family and fled to India via Zayul.
You can ask an AI about the king of Bomi
Wangchen Dondrup for more details.
Gyalong Lake is located at the entrance
of the Peach Blossom Valley.
We're now going to explore the Peach
Blossom Valley. First stop is the area
around Gutong Village. In May, the
rapeseed flowers bloom yellow, the
barley is vibrant green, and there is
still plenty of snow on the mountains.
Continuing upstream, we reach Qingduo
Town. Ahead of Qingduo Town lies a
massive moraine ridge.
Behind the moraine ridge are the Juxie
Valley and snow-capped peaks.
In all of Zizang, the Peach Blossom
Valley has the most numerous and
spectacular glacial remains.
Through aerial photography, I got to
know professors and PhDs who study the
glaciers in this region. Thanks to them,
I received some expert insights into the
glaciers here.
The moraine ridge in Juxie Valley was
formed during the last glacial period,
about 10,000 to 20,000 years ago.
When the glaciers began to grow during
the last glacial period, sea levels
dropped accordingly.
At the last glacial maximum, the sea
level was over 100 m lower than it is
today.
What is now the Bohai Bay was entirely
dry land.
North America was even more extreme.
Half the continent was covered by an ice
sheet thousands of meters thick. When
the last ice age ended and sea levels
rose, some coastal civilizations were
submerged.
Doggerland, beneath the English Channel
today, is one such example.
We humans are often like that. If we
can't see it, we don't quite believe it.
Even though geography textbooks tell us
the Earth went through ice ages,
it's only when you see a massive moraine
ridge with your own eyes that you truly
believe it. Juxy Village was once buried
under glaciers hundreds of meters thick.
Today, it is a paradise on Earth with
only the distant snow-capped mountains
left to bear witness to the passage of
time.
Leaving the Juxy Valley, we head to the
neighboring Baypulong Valley, also known
as the Buyu Pasture.
Kayaking here looks pretty relaxing,
doesn't it? In truth, to get 2 minutes
of footage, I had to carry the boat for
3 hours.
The river at Buyu Pasture is shallow and
not suitable for long-distance paddling.
So, while it looks great in photos, it's
not really meant for kayaking as a
sport.
The two mountains behind the Buyu
Pasture are the same peaks seen from the
Juxy Valley.
There doesn't seem to be a standard name
for them,
so I won't mention their names. In
Zayzaya, there is often disagreement
over the names of lesser-known peaks.
But that doesn't matter. What matters is
that the summits look incredible.
From here, you can see the snowy
lighthouse of eastern Zizangnamha Barwa.
>> [music]
[music]
>> I once photographed the summit twice,
just a month apart,
and found that in just 1 month, the ice
and snow on the peak had changed
significantly.
The circled area here has started to
break apart,
hiding deeper into the Peach Blossom
Valley. The peach blossoms here are even
more vibrant than those at the valley
entrance.
This was filmed on April 6th, 2025
at Ling Hong Village in Yuxu Township.
In May 2020, after the pandemic
stabilized, I rode my motorcycle into
Zizang
and arrived at Peach Blossom Valley. I
saw a monastery nestled beneath the
snow-capped mountains that was
exceptionally beautiful.
With the permission of the monks, I
captured aerial footage of the
monastery. This monastery is called
Yuran Monastery. A few years later, a
PhD student researching glaciers
happened to send me an article.
The document contained a photo of Peach
Blossom Valley, which featured this very
same Yuran Monastery. After aligning
similar angles and confirming it was the
same monastery, I was completely
captivated by this photograph. The photo
was taken in 1935.
Who was the photographer? And what were
they doing here? With the help of AI's
powerful search capabilities,
I opened a door to the past.
The photo was taken by a British
expedition team in 1935.
They entered Eastern Zizang from Burma
to explore the Salween River.
They spent nearly 2 years mapping the
Salween basin, later publishing two
books, one of which is titled The
Salween.
The expedition route map in the book
left me quite astounded.
This team was likely the most
knowledgeable group on Earth regarding
the Salween River.
They explored every tributary and valley
in succession. Many mountain passes they
used are now abandoned.
The photo was most likely taken by
Ronald Kaulback,
a member of the team.
He came from a military family and had a
forceful personality.
While studying at Cambridge, he once
threw a wealthy student into a pond.
In 1933,
Kaulback briefly accompanied Kingdon
Ward on an expedition. However, he was
unable to enter Zizang at that time due
to permit issues.
In 1935,
his own expedition team was granted
permission to enter Zizang.
The photo of Yurin Monastery was taken
on the road from Peach Blossom Valley to
Ban Bar.
Shortly after the Salween expedition
ended, World War II broke out.
Kolbäck went undercover in Burma,
commanding over 10,000 Karen guerrillas,
and eliminating tens of thousands of
Japanese troops.
Let's continue introducing other members
of the Salween expedition.
John Hanbury Tracy was Kolbäck's
university classmate and close friend.
He was primarily responsible for the
surveying and mapping during the Salween
expedition.
During World War II, he was dispatched
to the Middle East for intelligence
work.
Finally, let's talk about Sherpa Lua.
Before the Salween expedition, he
reached the summit of Mount Kamet.
This mountain is visible from Zanda
County in Ngari. He suffered severe
frostbite during the Kamet ascent,
losing most of his toes. Besides Kamet,
he also participated in climbs of
Everest, Kang Sang Junga, and Nanga
Parbat. During the Salween expedition,
Kolbäck discovered many mounds in the
Bodui Valley. He once thought these were
tombs from an ancient battlefield.
As Yurin Monastery itself sits atop such
a mound, in fact, these are remnants of
ancient glaciers, known as moraine
hills.
Near Yurin Monastery, there is another
temple called Gongwu Monastery.
Curiously, Kolbäck's books make no
mention of this monastery. Behind the
monastery stands the 6,000 m high Yurin
Peak.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We fly to the summit of Yurin Peak to
overlook the entire Peach Blossom
Valley. Gyala Peri and Namcha Barwa
reappear in the distance.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Peach Blossom Valley is a place worthy
of deep exploration.
Examples include the Yurin Kora Trek and
the mountain route callback took to
Banbar County.
I trekked to a nearby lake, commonly
known as Bear Lake. Its official name
should be Cuopu Lake. I first came
across a video of Bear Lake in 2021,
filmed by Master Paul from Bomi. In June
2025,
I hired a local guide to take me
trekking to Bear Lake.
I posted the video of the trek online,
and to my surprise, it immediately
attracted a large number of backpackers.
In truth, I feel conflicted about these
off-the-beaten-path spots in Zizang. I
want to share their beauty, yet I fear
they will become internet-famous tourist
traps. Once they become popular, they
face issues like littering, forced fees
by villagers, and mandatory guide
requirements. Glaciers once developed
here at Bear Lake, eventually forming
the lake body. The lake's outlet forms a
waterfall. Such extreme scenery is rare,
even in Zizang. Rhododendrons bloom by
the lakeshore. On my way up, I saw rare
plants like Meconopsis, Soulbury,
and Cypripedium himalaicum.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Our exploration of Peach Blossom Valley
ends here. Next, we head to the Yarlung
Canyon. Dense forests cover the entrance
to the Yarlung Canyon. Asia's tallest
tree grows here. The tree king is a
Cupressus torulosa. The tree king was
only discovered by a scientific
expedition in 2023.
This tree is approximately 1,450
years old and reaches a height of 102 m.
To grow to such a height, the
environment is crucial. The tree king
grows on the shady side of the mountain
where rainfall is abundant. The top of
the tree absorbs moisture directly from
the air. However, the very top of the
tree king has withered. The tree king is
not alone. There are over 20 other
Himalayan cypresses in this area
exceeding 90 m. Could a taller tree be
discovered one day? Personally, I
believe it is possible because Eastern
Tibet
contains so many unexplored regions. The
tree king was found in 2023. Before
that, I had passed this spot many times,
yet I never noticed this forest of
giants, even though it is right by the
roadside. Thus, an amateur remains an
amateur after all. Venturing deeper into
Yigong, we reached the site of the
Yigong debris flows. On our current
maps, there was once a lake called
Yigong so in this area, which has now
vanished. Let's start from the
beginning. In 1900, a debris flow
occurred in Jamunang Gully. On the right
side of the screen, the river was
blocked forming a barrier lake and the
Yigong Tsangpo stopped flowing for a
month. Later, the lake water overflowed,
but the barrier dam was not completely
washed away. Yigong Lake existed for 100
years until a cataclysmic event occurred
in 2000. On April 9th, 2000, another
massive landslide and debris flow
erupted in Jamunang Gully. This scale
was even larger, turning Yigong so into
a gargantuan barrier lake. Two months
later, the dam breached. The resulting
massive flood destroyed bridges along
the banks. Downstream regions in India
and Bangladesh also suffered from this
disaster. Hundreds of lives were lost
and the flood affected the homes of
millions. NASA's website features a
series of images showing the changes
before and after the debris flow. They
showed the stages before the flow, the
barrier lake phase, and the state after
the dam breach. Since then, Yigong has
returned to its pre-1900 appearance. The
aforementioned Frederick Bailey arrived
in Yigong in July 1913.
He recorded the locals' descriptions of
the barrier lake. Locals said the Jamuna
debris flow occurred in the year of the
monkey as that was a year for the Zari
Kora. Based on this calculation, the
debris flow should have occurred in
1896.
Today, the landslide mass is completely
covered with pine trees. When the
downstream roads of Yigong are damaged,
there is another mountain path leading
to Dongju in Lulang. In the summer of
1935,
Kingdon Ward crossed the mountains via
the Sab La Pass. Generally speaking,
Ward was a relatively pure scientific
explorer. In contrast, Bailey and other
explorers often carried political
agendas. The Yigong so before us has
undergone a transformation from river to
lake and back over a century.
Personally, I am particularly fond of
Yigong. It has a low elevation of only
about 2,200 m surrounded by snow-capped
peaks. In Zizang, second only to Medog,
spring arrives earliest in Yêgong. Large
numbers of black-necked cranes and
common cranes winter here, flying away
in April.
>> [screaming]
[music]
>> Spring in eastern Zayü
brings heavy rain and snow. Avalanches
are frequent in the Yêgong Canyon. As
summer arrives, we return to Yêgong once
more.
In 1935,
Ward set out from Yêgong and followed
the valley all the way to Nayü. We also
explore upstream along the Yêgong
Tsangpo. The southern side of the canyon
is the shady slope, giving rise to
numerous waterfalls. These waterfalls
all originate from the glaciers and snow
pack on the mountain peaks. Ward
documented his expeditions with writings
that combined professional knowledge
with local customs and daily life.
Consequently, his books were very
popular bestsellers. Ward was a
botanical expert with profound knowledge
of plant life. He was also well-versed
in geology and glaciology. During his
expeditions in Zayul, Ward took away a
vast number of plant specimens and
seeds. These greatly enriched the
gardens of Europe. Thus, Zayul made
Ward's career, while Ward contributed
records that allow us to understand
Zayul's past. While Ward was exploring
Yegong, the gorilla leader Colback was
also on expedition in eastern Zayul,
likely around Zayu.
>> [music]
[music]
>> On the right bank of the Yegong River
lies the picturesque Langyu Village near
Bagai Township. Continuing upriver, we
arrive at the ancient Reka Village.
Ward's book highlights Reka Village. He
estimated there were over 80 log cabins
and more than 300 residents. On clear
winter days, many snow mountains are
visible from Rika. In those days, the
trekking paths were extremely
treacherous. The way to Nayu required
traversing cliffside trails. Let's pause
our tracking of Ward's route for now and
explore a hidden paradise.
>> [music]
[music]
>> The road to this hidden gem follows a
tributary of the Yarlung Tsangpo. As of
2025,
it has been upgraded to a paved asphalt
road. The end of the road is Longpu
Village, situated on a flat pasture.
Through the gaps in the mountains,
distant glaciers are visible. I won't
explore them, but those glaciers lacked
distinct features. I also set up
infrared cameras on the nearby
mountains. Unfortunately, the placement
was poor and no wildlife was captured. I
only got hundreds of photos of domestic
yaks grazing in the wild. Our
exploration ends here. Returning to
Yarlung again, it is already winter.
Compared to Peach Blossom Valley, we
find that the ancient glacial remnants
in Yarlung are not obvious. This is
mainly due to intense geological changes
that have erased the glacial traces.
Only careful identification reveals the
remains of moraine ridges on on mountain
sides. There is a valley in the
direction of Bayu Village in Yêgōng
Township. The branches of the valley
contain many glaciers. China's longest
maritime glacier is located here, called
the Kaken Glacier. In literature, the
length of the Kaken Glacier is recorded
as 35 km. However, with the melting in
recent years, the data may need
updating. Next to the Kaken Glacier is
the Ruo'er Gou Glacier. In September
1993, hunters from Yêgōng Township were
hunting on the Ruo'er Gou Glacier and
discovered aircraft wreckage at an
altitude of 4,100
m. They immediately reported it to the
government and the Xizang Military
District sent personnel to follow the
hunters into the mountains for
investigation. It was identified as a
crashed Hump Route transport plane from
World War II. In 1944,
this C-46 transport plane, numbered
4123862,
was returning to India from Kunming. It
lost its way due to weather conditions
and crashed in Yêgōng. All five American
crew members perished. In 1994,
China handed over the remains of the
five crew members recovered during the
search to the United States. During
World War II, another Hump Route plane
lost its way, but successfully landed
near today's Samye Monastery in Shannan.
All crew members were safe. This is
considered the first plane to fly from
Kunming to Lhasa, ending our exploration
of Yêgōng. We return to National Highway
318.
This is the Gangbu Glacier, south of
Lhayul Township. In the era of Ward and
Bailey's expeditions, the administrative
center of the Lulang area was
Dongzhuzong. It was here that the tailor
Kinthup was sold into slavery. A zong
was equivalent to a county-level
administration. Dongzhu was once the
confluence of several roads. Today, the
Sichuan-Xizang Railway passes through
the Dongzhu Valley. Opposite the Dongzhu
Valley is Shibagangri. In 1935,
Ward crossed the mountains from Dongzhu
into Yugong. In an earlier expedition in
1924,
Ward took the Nambu La Pass from Dongzhu
to Basum Tso. Today, this is an
abandoned ancient path traversed only by
a few outdoor experts. We also arrive at
Basum Tso. In Ward's books, monasteries
were also referred to as priories or
abbeys, although we Chinese do not call
them that, literally. Practicing the way
xiudao fits the function of a monastery
perfectly. While Ward was trekking and
surveying in 1935,
a scholar was conducting research in
Ngari Xizang. This man was Giuseppe
Tucci, a master of Xizang religion and
art. Tucci's expeditions to Xizang were
supported by the Mussolini government.
However, regarding Xizang, Tucci
generally maintained political
correctness, so his books could be
published in China. In contrast, Bailey
was not a good person. Basum Tso is a
glacial lake left behind by the retreat
of the last glacial period. There are
numerous moraine ridges near Basum Tso.
In my 2022 release, Heavenly Xizang, I
borrowed a research paper to introduce
moraine dating. later. The author of the
paper saw my video and added me on
WeChat. That video was criticized by
netizens for borrowing too many academic
elements, making it sleep in
Therefore, I have adjusted the direction
for this documentary. By the way, if any
footage in my videos is of value for
academic research, please contact me. I
will provide it for free. Like Peach
Blossom Valley, Basum so once developed
glaciers over 100 km long. However,
Peach Blossom Valley did not leave
behind a lake. There are several valleys
upstream of Basum so where retreating
glaciers hide. The corresponding lakes
are Shinso, Pugongluo,
So, and Jongso. Before leaving Basum so,
here is a photo of the lake island taken
by Ward in 1924.
After exploring Basum so, Ward went to
Julu Township to rest at Julu Monastery.
When Ward arrived at Julu Monastery,
some changes were occurring. Over 60
monks were being expelled for violating
precepts. At its peak, Julu Monastery
had over 800 people. Ward's travelogues
often recorded trivial matters, giving
us a new understanding of that era. For
example, at Julu Monastery, he actually
ate biscuits made in Australia. While
making the video, I found a photo that
included Julu Monastery. Julu Monastery
is located at the confluence of two
rivers. One tributary of these rivers
originates from the Naylong Glacier. We
walk upstream along the the river. Along
the way, we pass a granite stone forest
called Dorje Tser Rocks. There are large
distributions of granite in the Gongbo
Gyamda area. The Gyalmo Ngulchu basin
has a wetland that is very suitable for
rafting. The water is shallow and
gentle. Ward's 1924 expedition went all
the way to the end at Panga Village,
then crossed the mountains to Lhari
County. In the 1935 expedition, he came
from Gyagon to Nyingchi. After passing
the Yiga Glacier, he continued westward,
then crossed the Luochong La Pass to
arrive at Panga Village again. We also
come to Habaso, near Panga Village. I
was filming Habaso from the air in 2020
when I discovered a beautiful glacial
waterfall.
>> [music]
>> The exploration of the Basum Tso area
ends here. We returned to Lulang once
more. Our current National Highway 318
connects Nyingchi and Lulang via the
Serkhym La Pass. But before the highway
was built, where was the pass? The
answer is the Demula Pass. The Demula
Pass, which has become popular on short
video platforms in recent years, was
traversed by Bailey and Ward 100 years
ago. Actually, it's a bit unfair to say
that these roads were all forged by the
local people. While Ward was panting and
crossing the Sangpo Pass to Gyagon, he
saw a Zang mother carrying her child
over the pass. What we consider a
five-star trekking route today was
merely a common path back then. Bailey's
attempt to explore the core of the Grand
Canyon failed because the local Mompa
people he encountered refused to
cooperate. Now we arrive at Lulang. Many
people have visited Lulang, but few
notice that the area near Lulang Gang So
is actually the terminal moraine of a
glacier. I surprisingly only discovered
by reading Ward's travelogues. In Ward's
time, Lulang was just a small village
under the Dong Zhu Jiang. He probably
never imagined how prosperous today's
Lulang would become. My first visit to
Lulang was in 2013 during my bicycle
trip. The past decade has witnessed
earth-shaking changes in Zaza. For
instance, the high-voltage power towers
on the hills erected along the
Sichuan-Zizang Highway began operating
in 2018. The future Sichuan-Zizang
Railway will also draw power from here.
Ward and Bailey's travelogues repeatedly
mention a village called Dongbakai. This
village leads to the Baifeng Tai viewing
platform. However, Ward and the others
never actually went there. Bafeng Tai is
the premier location for photographing
Namcha Barwa. In summer, Bafeng Tai is
home to many rare plants such as
Meconopsis and Room Nobile. Bailey was
the first to discover the blue poppies
in the Lulang area. Europeans have a
mystical fascination with blue flowers.
Ward collected the seeds of these blue
poppies and brought them back to
Britain, astounding the European public.
Another question that concerned Ward was
whether Gyala Peri sits on the main axis
of the Himalayas. Ward believed that
Gyala Peri did not belong to the
Himalayan range. Today, we know he was
mistaken. Since the liberation of
Xizang, our country has conducted
large-scale scientific expeditions. The
second comprehensive scientific
expedition is currently underway. Our
understanding of Xizang has undergone a
revolutionary transformation.
Namcha Barwa marks the eastern starting
point of the Himalayas. For the next
part of our journey, we will travel west
along the Himalayas. First, we descend
to Daylam Village in the Grand Canyon.
The winter mist shrouds the river
surface. Over 150 years ago, the British
already knew of the downstream
Brahmaputra River and the upstream
Yarlung Tsangpo,
but they did not know if they were the
same river. The Grand Canyon remains one
of the few unknown regions on this
planet. Thus, Kinthup of Sikkim was the
first to embark on this journey of
exploration. No one would have expected
that fewer people can reach the core
area today than 150 years ago. Now,
let's rotate the camera 180°,
turning our backs to Namcha Barwa. 2 km
downstream from Pai Town, the main
project of the Medog Hydro Power Station
is located. Next, let's talk about this
project of the universe, the Medog Hydro
Power Station. When I trekked through
the Great Bend in the past, I
encountered a team from a design
institute. Everyone felt that the Medog
Hydro Power Station might not start for
another 50 years. To my surprise, work
has already begun. The engineering
design involves building a dam at Paitao
to divert water into a tunnel. The
tunnel will pierce through the Himalayas
with a vertical drop of 2,500
m featuring a five-stage cascade power
station. At the same time, a larger
regulatory reservoir was built in the
upstream city of Malin.
We continue westward to the Buddha Palm
Sand Dunes. This footage was shot in
before it was fenced off. Continuing
west, we arrive at Jangda Town in Nang
County, Nyingchi. The mixed forests are
turned yellow by the autumn wind.
Several interesting lakes are hidden in
the high reaches of these valleys. In
particular, blood-red lakes are quite
rare.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Finally, the Nyingchi section ends and
we enter the Lhoka region. In Lhoka,
there is a high-altitude lake, the
sacred lake Lhamo Latso. It holds a
supreme position in the Gelug school,
believed to reveal reincarnations.
A few years ago, filming was prohibited
and as of 2025,
the scenic area is closed. This footage
was captured in 2016. Continuing west,
we reach Dagpo Kagyu Monastery in Gyaca
County. Founded in 1121, it is the
ancestral monastery of the Kagyu school.
The Kagyu school has four major and
eight minor subsects. One minor subsect
is the Drukpa Kagyu, which later became
the national religion of Bhutan.
Along the Yarlung Tsangpo in Gyaca
County, there are numerous massive
boulders. These boulders are embedded
with pebbles resembling concrete called
Malos Conglomerate. Its formation is
related to plate collisions and the
uplift of the plateau. Next, we head
south to Jaggia Monastery in Zari
Township, Lhünzê County. It belongs to
the Drukpa Kagyu and is a starting point
for the Zari Kora. Every year of the
monkey, a grand pilgrimage is held.
Bailey and Ward both reached this
vicinity. During the year of the monkey
pilgrimage in 1944,
a monk completed the Zari Kora while
carrying a gun. The Zari Kora in those
days had a mortality rate possibly
exceeding 5%. Before the liberation of
Xizang, this monk left via Yadong and
India. He was a Han Chinese born in
Nanjing in 1916 named Xing Suzhi with
the Dharma name Lobsang Phuntsok. He
later served as a visiting professor at
the University of Washington and
published A Quest for Buddha Dharma in
the Land of Snows. Master Xing lived
until September 2014,
passing away at the age of 98. This book
introduces the arduous experiences
of his pilgrimage. Through it, we gain
an understanding of the complex
historical environment of the Zari
sacred mountain.
Following the Himalayas westward,
between Kuju Township and Zona City and
Banbar Township in Lhodrak County, there
is a mountain pass called the Jimu
Gongli Pass with an altitude of 5,446
m. Next, we arrive at Kharchu Monastery
in Lhokha Prefecture. In summer, Kharchu
Monastery is often shrouded in mist and
clouds. The wildlife feeding at Kharchu
Monastery is a major draw for tourists.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Near Lhoka is Lhozhag Township. Lhozhag
is close to Bhutan. Within its
jurisdiction, some new resettlement
villages are worth a visit, such as
Gyalwobu and Demalong. However, they do
not offer top-tier scenery. There is a
decent waterfall near Lhozhag Township,
as well.
Next, we come to Pimli Tso. Pemling Tso
became an internet sensation in 2025.
However, Zizang has many similar
landscapes. Pemling Tso is not
necessarily the pinnacle. The snow
mountains and lakes in this area are
likely familiar to everyone, so I will
skip the introduction. In Sê Township of
Lhodrak County, there is the Gongzhong
Pu Road leading to the Bhutanese border.
This road can lead us to several
glaciers. One of them is the Khunggo
Lung Glacier. Ending our exploration of
Sê Township, we head to the northern
slope of Kulha Kangri. At the foot of
Mount Khargang, there is a lake at an
altitude of over 5,400
m that freezes in winter. Let me tell
you a horror story. Guess where the most
dangerous spot is when such a glacial
lake freezes. The answer is the area
near the glacier where meltwater is
constantly flowing in. I slid over on an
ice sled and found water seeping through
the ice. Now, let's take an aerial look
at Khargang, Kulha Kangri, and Gangkhar
Puensum.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Continuing our border journey, we arrive
at Puma Yumco. Most lakes in Zhuzhang
have been thoroughly studied by
researchers. If you want a deeper
understanding, you can directly search
for academic papers using keywords
regarding the mineralization of the
lakes, the reasons for their formation,
as well as their size and depth rigorous
data exists for all of these. I will not
repeat them in the video.
>> [music]
>> When the water level of Puma Yumco is
high, it overflows into Yamdrok Yumco.
As is well known, Yamdrok Yumco is a
lake of a thousand islands with
countless photography spots. If we were
to vote for the best spot, the heart of
Yamdrok would certainly be a candidate.
In the autumn of 2023,
the heart of Yamdrok turned a peculiar
red color. This phenomenon has not
recurred in the years since.
>> [music]
>> Not far from the heart of Yamdrok is a
large island called Young Buduo Island.
There is a Young Buduo Monastery on the
island. Obviously, entering and leaving
requires a boat.
Next, let's look at an old photo of
Yamdrok Yumco. Anyone traveling from
Lhasa to Yamdrok is familiar with this
angle. This is on the road to Nagarze
with Mount Noijin Kangsang in the
distance. This photo was taken in 1938
by a British man. This is likely not the
first photo of Yamdrok Yamtso because
cameras were already widely popular by
then.
We know that Yamdrok Yamtso is one of
the three great sacred lakes. In fact,
Yamdrok Yamtso is also a giant power
bank. Sounds strange, doesn't it? A
pipeline connects Yamdrok Yamtso to the
Yarlung Tsangpo below the mountain. When
there is surplus electricity in the
power grid, water from the Yarlung
Tsangpo is pumped into Yamdrok Yamtso.
When the grid is short on power, the
water from Yamdrok Yamtso is used to
generate electricity. This pump storage
system is still in operation today. The
amount of water pumped in equals the
amount released, ensuring that the water
level of Yamdrok Yamtso is not affected.
When I learned about this, I searched
through the videos on my hard drive for
traces of the Yamdrok power station. I
found a clip filmed in 2016 showing the
tunnel entrance of the power station.
The tunnel entrance is located in
Jamalong Village.
Leaving the Yamdrok power bank, we
arrive at the Chiuming Yong Glacier. The
Chiuming Yong Glacier has multiple
remnants of ancient glaciers. Different
terminal moraines correspond to
different glacial eras.
For detailed research, you can search
for relevant academic papers.
Continuing our border journey, we arrive
at the Chuoja Glacier. Chuoja Glacier is
the official name, which has been
unified in navigation software and
academic literature.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Next, we will leave the Loka region and
enter the Shigats region. This is
Shisou, also known as Sangwang. So, the
true source of the Nyang River. On July
10th, 1954,
a glacial collapse occurred at Shisou.
The glacier slid into the lake, causing
the water level to rise and the glacial
lake to breach its dam. The downstream
Nyang River suffered a severe flood
disaster. Over 400 people lost their
lives and thousands of houses were
destroyed. Next to Shisou is Shimosou.
Its name name means yellow lake, which
is quite fitting. In 2019,
the area around Guili Village was freely
accessible. I explored many glaciers
that year. At the time, I saw a glacier
on the satellite map. So, I walked into
the valley, but for a long time, I
couldn't see any glacier. It turned out
I had entered the wrong valley. When I
got up across to the top of the moraine
ridge, the magnificent glacier suddenly
came into view. This glacier is called
the Kumapu Glacier.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Returning to the Kumapu Glacier in 2024,
large chunks of ice are floating in the
water. The glacier is accelerating its
melt.
Moving forward, we arrive at Kogabir.
This is a lake with very high aesthetic
value. By the shores of Kogabir, there
is a border trade route leading to
Bhutan. Therefore, Kogabir has been
closed to tourists.
>> [music]
>> Continuing westward along the Himalayas,
we arrive at Mount Chomohari. Let's look
at an old photo first. The photo was
taken in 1904 at Towena Village below
Mount Chomohari. This military camp
belonged to the British Army that
invaded Xizang. The international
context at the time was the Great Game
between Britain and Russia. Britain was
misled by certain rumors. The rumors
suggested that Russian influence had
already permeated Lhasa. Among those
spreading these rumors was Kang Yuwei,
who was taking refuge in Darjeeling.
Regardless, the invasion of Xizang was
an atrocious act. The leader of the army
was Francis Younghusband. The British
army used advanced weaponry to carry out
a massacre of the Zezong soldiers. Mount
Chomolhari bore witness to this
slaughter. History and reality always
tell us that the world is governed by
the law of the jungle. Only when a
country is strong can it avoid being
bullied. Frederick Bailey, who explored
the Grand Canyon, was also part of
Younghusband's team. He took several
photographs of this invasion. The
British invasion reached Chonze County.
The Zezong fortress Gyantse
was the battlefield for the resistance
against the British. This war against
invasion ended in a crushing defeat. And
from then on, British influence
permeated Lhasa. Let's look at some old
photos of Lhasa. This is a photo of the
Potala Palace from 1900. The
photographer was a Russian named
Gombazhav Tsybikov. He was an ethnic
Mongol from the area around Lake Baikal.
This one is a photo of the Potala Palace
taken by Bailey in 1904. A Japanese monk
was also active in Lhasa from 1912 to
1916.
This is a photo he took of the Potala
Palace. His name was Bunkyo Aoki. The
clearest photos were taken in 1939 by
the British man Frederick Mackenzie. The
photo of Yongdrok Yönkhö was also taken
by him. When I saw Mackenzie's photos, I
was curious why they were so clear. It
turns out the negatives of these photos
were very large, about half the size of
an A4 sheet of paper. The resolution is
extremely high, no less clear than a
mobile phone from 2010. In that era,
photography and cinematography equipment
were already quite advanced. In Lhasa,
one could even see Charlie Chaplin
movies. This photo was taken by Germans
in 1939.
It was a team sent to investigate the
Zizang race. Many expedition teams
entered Lhasa during this period. The
United States even filmed a color
documentary. Today, tens of thousands of
old photos of Zizang can be found in
European museums. My first time in Lhasa
was in 2011. I took a photo of the
Potala Palace with a Nokia phone.
Besides people, animals also entered
Zizang. The elephants in the Potala
Palace entered Lhasa from South Asia via
Johns. Let's return to Mount Chomolhari.
This is a photo of Chomolhari taken by a
man named Spencer Chapman. In 1936,
he entered Zizang from Yadong and was
captivated by the Chomolhari snow
mountain. After completing his work in
Lhasa, he decided to climb Chomolhari.
Although his equipment was rudimentary,
he succeeded. To this day, not many
people have reached the summit of Mount
Chomolhari. Yet, Frederick Spencer
Chapman completed the first human ascent
in 1937.
After World War II broke out, he joined
guerrilla forces in Malaya to fight
against the Japanese army. He fought on
the front lines in the jungle enduring
countless hardships and narrowly
escaping death. From this perspective,
he was a lone hero. His wartime
experiences later became a reference
manual for special forces wilderness
survival. The top man's later years were
bleak and his body was plagued by
illness. Driven by a fierce sense of
self-respect, he committed suicide by
gunshot in 1971.
Today, let's look at Mount Chomolhari,
which Chapman first climbed.
>> [music]
[music]
>> The Himalayas, where Chomolhari is
located, contain a large number of
glacial lakes. Behind my motorcycle are
the electrical and fiber optic cables
leading to Yadong. Zizang's first
communication line was laid from Yadong
to Gyantse in 1904. For a long time,
this road was a major trade corridor for
Zizang. Every day, perhaps hundreds of
people entered Yadong from Kalimpong.
Personnel investigating Zizang during
the Republic of China era also took this
route back to the mainland. The route
went through Gyantse and Yadong to
India, then by boat to Shanghai. The
elephants for the Potala Palace also
walked from Chomolhari to Lhasa. Since
aerial photography is prohibited in
Yadong, we go to the next stop, Gamba
County. This is the Kudingnaima Glacier.
It was once a relatively accessible
glacier, but it was closed in 2025.
>> [music]
[music]
>> There are 14 mountains in the world
exceeding 8,000 m arranged from east to
west. The first is Kangchenjunga. The
world's third highest peak sits right
behind the glacier. Continuing west, we
arrive at the Killing Canyon scenic
area.
And then to Zangso Lake. The snow
mountain behind Zangso is Mount Ama
Dran. When I made the last aerial
documentary, it was still an unclimbed
peak, but now there are records of
successful ascents. In recent years, I
felt that with the end of the pandemic,
domestic outdoor sports have developed
rapidly and mountaineering, trekking,
and exploration are all progressing.
What can you see from the summit of
Mount Ama Dran? Let's use a drone to
simulate it. With a 7x zoom, we look
east toward Kangchenjunga. To the west
are Makalu, Lots, and Mount Everest.
This area is a dense zone of 8,000 m
peaks in the Himalayas. Modern
mountaineering originated in the west.
Before World War II, many 7,000 m peaks
had already been climbed. After the war
ended, 8,000 m peaks were also rapidly
conquered. Unlike Westerners, the ethnic
groups near the Himalayas are often not
keen on climbing. They revere nature and
respect the snow mountains as sacred.
However, driven by honor and profit,
everything has changed. Let's admire the
view of Mount Everest from the summit of
Mount Ama Dran in the valley between Ama
Dran and Everest. There is a border town
called The residents here are Sherpas.
Although they share the same roots as
the Sherpas in Nepal, the Sherpas in
China do not participate in
mountaineering assistance. Currently,
there is only one road into Chentang. In
the future, a road connecting Chentang
to Kudang Township will be built. This
will allow direct access from Chentang
to the east face of Mount Everest.
Trekking on the east face of Everest is
now completely prohibited. In fact, one
might even support a total ban on
climbing Everest. Such a view may seem
extreme, but the reasoning is worth
considering. If we reflect on why people
climb, once fame and fortune are
stripped away, what reasons remain? If
it is purely out of love and the climber
seeks no acclaim after reaching the
summit, that would be worthy of respect.
However, in reality, high-altitude
mountaineering can often become a venue
for personal vanity. What many take away
is the glory of the summit. What is
often left behind is the environmental
impact of waste along the routes. In
many things in this world, there is no
absolute right or wrong. It's just a
matter of perspective. If one were to
start climbing one day, one would surely
find high-sounding justifications for
doing so. Here, we are looking at Lhotse
and Mount Everest from the 10,000 sand
dunes.
From the Fuzi La Pass, five 8,000 m
peaks are visible. Kangchenjunga,
Everest, and Lhotse. No, Makalu is
blocked from view, followed by Cho Oyu,
>> [music]
[music]
>> and the 7,000 m
level Gaurishankar,
as well as Shishapangma, which lies
entirely within China. Using Giles and
Chalk as the foreground, let's admire
the Himalayan snow mountain range.
>> [music]
>> In October 2019,
a trek was made into a valley in
Rongshar Gorge. The journey was in
search of a specific snow mountain. The
valley was silent, far from the hustle
and bustle of the world. An elderly
Zaisan couple was herding livestock
here. At the end of the valley is a
glacial lake. The mountain in question
is behind the valley. The summit of this
mountain has a wind horn. The mountain
is called Lunagri, with an altitude of
6,900
m, but it is extremely difficult to
climb. A Nepalese mountaineer reached
the summit in October 2018 and brought
back breathtaking aerial footage. The
snow mountain, with its summit shrouded
in a cap cloud is Cho Oyu.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We arrive at Rongshar Township in
Rongshar Gorge. This is the new
Rongshar, rebuilt after the 2015
earthquake. The brand new small
buildings were constructed by the state
and provided to the villagers.
Significant investment in Zizang over
many years has improved the local living
conditions.
>> [music]
>> Continuing west, we arrive at
Shishapangma. The trek began from Air
Village to approach the east face of
Shishapangma. There is a trekking route
from the east face to the north face.
Every year during the National Day
holiday, it attracts many heavy-duty
trekking enthusiasts. However, the
altitude here is extremely high and
every year the mountain claims the lives
of backpackers. Every time an accident
occurs, police are mobilized for search
and rescue. During one return trip, a
rescue team was encountered. Being
mistaken for a lost trekker led to a
severe reprimand. From the angle of the
east face, the main peak is obscured. We
switch to the north face of
Shishapangma, which is the location of
the base camp. What you see now is the
north face. On October 7th, 2023,
two experienced climbers came to
challenge
both were nearing the completion of all
14 peaks over 8,000 m. Shishapangma was
their final objective and the pursuit of
a record created an environment of
intense pressure. As they neared the
summit, conditions became treacherous.
Tragically, multiple avalanches occurred
on the slopes that day. The climbers and
their guides were caught in the slides
leading to a devast stating loss of
life. This tragedy is a somber reminder
of the dangers of competitive
mountaineering. We must pay respect to
the unpredictable nature of high
altitude environments. Bidding farewell
to Shishapangma,
>> [music]
>> we continue west to explore a new
location. In some views, this is the
most beautiful glacial lake in the
Himalayas. The trip took place in the
winter after the pandemic. The vehicle
was parked near Piku, so despite the
cold and a persistent cough, the journey
continued. The road had been traveled
many times during the day, so no track
had been recorded. Unexpectedly, the
path was lost in the night and it was
necessary to wait until dawn to
continue. The trekking route involves
visiting Gwa Kyong so on the right, Dung
Guru so on the left upon return, and
finally back to the starting point.
Gwa Kyong so is a massive glacial lake
and walking on this ice is a unique
experience. During a summer visit, it
was impossible to get close to the
glacier.
>> [music]
[music]
>> The massive ice wall of Gwa Kyung Seo is
remarkably sheer, appearing as if cut by
a blade.
Two days later, the journey continued to
the neighboring Guru Seo.
The glacier at Guru Seo is more chaotic
and has a different aesthetic than the
wall at Gwa Kyung Seo. Since the lake is
frozen in winter, a view in autumn
provides a different perspective. Gwa
Kyung Seo sits at an altitude of about
5,350
m, slightly higher than Guru Seo. During
the summer trek, fish were discovered in
the river. Such a cold place is not
entirely barren in the summer. Nourished
by the river water, rare plants grow in
the vicinity, such as Meconopsis, blue
poppies.
>> [music]
[music]
>> There are multiple glaciers and lakes
near Guoquiong. So, the neighboring lake
is filled with floating ice blocks. On
some maps, it is referred to as the
iceberg lake.
Next,
we arrive at the Gyirong Valley. Wang
Gyirong Valley reflects half the history
of Zezong. Many major historical events
took place here. Princess Bhrikuti
entered Zezong through this valley. Wang
Xuance of the Tang Dynasty led his
mission to India, famously conquering a
kingdom alone. Padmasambhava
entered Zezong, and the Qing Dynasty
military expeditions also took this
route.
In the past, if you asked about
attractions in locals would recommend
Langji. So, as the reflection in the
lake resembles a Buddha.
>> [music]
>> However, we outsiders prefer the snow
mountains here. In 2019,
I noticed construction starting on a
black mountain peak. This turned out to
be a stunning observation deck
accessible by motor vehicle. Standing on
this platform, I lamented how such a
beautiful place had remained hidden.
While Mount Niubi in Sichuan claims to
be the largest observation deck in Asia,
I decided to give this platform a name,
Asia No. One observation deck.
To spread this name, one has to be
persuasive. When friends ask for travel
tips in I'd tell them there is an Asia
No.
One observation deck at a specific
location. Unsuspecting travelers began
spreading the name. By 2023,
it had become a sensation. However, I
later learned it was a military facility
and it eventually closed to the public.
This Labrador is named Aladdin, the dog
from the Baik Hotel. The Longtong Lerang
Snow Mountain opposite belongs to Nepal,
but the best vantage point is in Gyirong
Town.
>> [music]
[music]
>> There is a village in Gyirong called
Rima, which is also an excellent spot
for viewing snow mountains.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Next, we head to a geological park,
Gangdang National Geological Park. You
likely haven't heard of it because I
made the name up. About 26 km south of
Gyirong County, a road leads to Gangdang
Township. This road passes through the
Duwala Pass. Looking west from Mount
Duwala, a massive anticline runs from
east to west. As geology describes, an
anticline eventually forms a valley. The
highway passes through the valley of
this anticline. The Himalayas were
formed by plate compression and this
anticline is clear evidence. I found
many marine fossils in this valley. For
instance, this piece might be a crinoid
sea lily fossil. The discovery was
entirely accidental. I had stopped to
register at a checkpoint. There was a
black dog at the checkpoint and while
interacting with it, I noticed the
unusual shape of a stone on the ground.
Fossils confirm that this area was once
a vast ocean. Continuing forward through
a pass, we see Mount Shamar to the
south.
After taking the cliffside road to Niang
Village, we witness magnificent
large-scale folding in the valley. A
geology expert, Mr. Wang, explained that
the Gongdang area has undergone severe
geological compression and possesses
rich geological strata. It could be
called a museum of sedimentary rocks.
Therefore, we believe the Gongdang route
is comparable to a national geological
park. The mountain road from Niang
Village to Ning Village is full of
twists and turns. There is abundant
wildlife along the way. Black wolves are
very rare in the wild. Black fur is a
recessive gene. A black wolf is only
born if both parents carry this gene.
Another possibility is the exchange of
genes between wolves and dogs.
>> [music]
[music]
>> After passing Ning Village, I arrive at
the Great Cliff. I first filmed this
cliff in 2023,
though some friends had filmed it
earlier. When I posted a short video, I
gave this cliff a name, the Great
Himalayan Cliff. The seasons flow on.
Winter turns to spring. In summer, we
return to the Gangdang National
Geological Park.
Seeing Mount Qomolangma again, a herd of
cattle now serves as the foreground.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Along the Gangdang route, Mount Manaslu
can be seen multiple times. In winter,
the desolate Ning Village is surrounded
by highland barley fields. Mist and
clouds drift around the great cliff.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Leaving Gangdang and passing through
Chungu Township, we enter National
Highway 219.
Let's explore Luoinbo Kangri. I first
explored Luoinbo Kangri in 2019. At the
time, I saw a cluster of snow mountains
on the satellite map and came to see if
there was good scenery. I filmed
Pulaxikong,
which later became known as King Peak.
Personally, I didn't find this mountain
particularly appealing. Aesthetics are
subjective, after all. In comparison,
the main peak, Luoinbo Kangri, is quite
impressive. Luoinbo Kangri is the
highest peak of the Gangdise Range.
There is a rough road that circles
Luoinbo Kangri. Now, we are directly
north of Luoinbo Kangri in the wetlands.
There is a family of three black-necked
cranes. Black-necked crane chicks hatch
in May or June. They grow extremely
fast, reaching adult size in just a few
months. After October, as the plateau
turns cold, they begin to migrate to
river valleys to overwinter. The Yarlung
Tsangpo Basin in Shigatse Lungmar County
and the Yugong River Valley are all
overwintering sites. Some black-necked
cranes even fly to Guizhou, Yunnan, or
as far as Ladakh. When winter turns to
spring, they fly back from low-altitude
areas to the high plateau to begin a new
cycle of nesting.
Looking toward Loinbo Kangri from the
perspective of the cranes, an explorer
arrived nearby 120 years ago. He
recorded Loinbo Kangri with watercolor
sketches.
This man was Sven Hedin. Between 1906
and 1908, Sven Hedin conducted in-depth
expeditions in Ngari and Shigatse. I saw
the sketches of Loinbo Kangri in his
book. Comparing them, I found the angle
to be remarkably close to the one where
I filmed the cranes. This illustration
comes from his book Transhimalaya:
Discoveries and Adventures in Tibet. In
our context, Zizag
We circle Loinbo Kangri to reach the
western side. From this angle, Loinbo
Kangri is quite beautiful. Leaving the
Gangdise Range, we continue along the
Himalayas. Located in Zhongba County, we
look toward the distant Annapurna. This
is the eighth 8,000 m peak of our
journey. To the right is the ninth 8,000
m peak, Dhaulagiri, which is also the
last one visible from within Zezang.
Continuing west, we arrive at Paryang
Town. This is the Maquan River Wetland
in the upper reaches of the Yarlung
Tsangpo. It is also an area where
desertification is relatively severe,
with westerly winds blowing year-round.
Sand dunes have taken on a crescent
shape.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Sven Hedin once searched for the source
of the Yarlung Tsangpo. In 1976,
an expedition by the Chinese Academy of
Sciences identified the Gima Yangzoin
Glacier as the true source. However,
around 2010, researchers discovered that
the source should actually be the Angsi
Dongdong Glacier. When we study the
sources of rivers, we find it can be a
confusing matter. We usually agree that
the source of the furthest tributary is
the true source. Yet, the Tuotuo River,
the official source of the Yangtze, is
not the longest. The Danqu River is
longer and has a greater flow, but it
originates from a marshland. The Tuotuo
River originates from the Jiangong
Glacier. A glacier fits the poetic image
of Yangtze's water coming from the
heavens much better. In the end, the
marshland source lost to the glacial
source. The official source of the
Yellow River, Gyaring Zaliecu, is
neither the longest nor the one with the
greatest flow. Its history is complex.
The Tang and Yuan Dynasties favored the
Kyarig as the true source. During the
Qianlong reign of the Qing Dynasty,
Gyaring Zaliecu was designated as the
official source. Scientific expeditions
in 1978 confirmed that the Kyarig has a
greater volume of water and is longer.
However, in the 1985
final review, Gyaring Zaliecu was still
declared the winner. Ultimately,
scientific data lost to historical and
cultural tradition. A brief
announcement, I will later produce an
amateur documentary on the Yellow River
from its source to the sea. The filming
is complete, but I haven't had time to
edit it.
Let's return to the source of the
Yarlung Tsangpo. This is the watershed.
On the left, the Angsi Dongdong flows
into the Yarlung Tsangpo. The right side
generally belongs to the Indus River
Basin. Meltwater from the right side
glaciers flows west into Lake
Manasarovar. When the water level of
Lake Manasarovar rises, it flows into
Lake Rakshastal. In ancient times, Lake
Rakshastal could flow into the Langqen
Zangbo Sutlej River. Today, it is
entirely an endorheic inland lake. On
the right is a sacred lake Manasarovar.
On the left is Lake Rakshastal. In the
distance is the sacred Mount Kailash and
behind us is Mount Namnani. Next, we
arrive at Burang County. On the hill by
the Peacock River in Burang are the
ruins of the Peacock Kingdom. After the
fall of the Tubo Empire, Tubo
descendants came to Ngari and
established three kingdoms: the Peacock
Kingdom, the Guge Kingdom, and the
Ladakh Kingdom. Therefore, India's
current occupation of Ladakh is illegal.
Next, we circle Lake Rakshastal. Lake
Rakshastal is known as the ghost lake.
There is a rumor about it claiming the
lake is bitter, undrinkable, barren, and
devoid of birds or animals. This was
intended to diminish Rakshastal in order
to exalt Manasarovar. It is true that
Rakshastal is salt water. I have tasted
it myself. However, the claim that it is
devoid of wildlife is completely false.
In winter, I personally saw thousands of
birds on the western shore of
Rakshastal. In fact, some rumors are
easy to debunk. The most dangerous thing
is copying and pasting without thinking.
In terms of scenery, Rakshastal actually
surpasses Manas though Manasarovar has
the added prestige of being a sacred
lake. The oldest photos of Mount Kailash
are over 120 years old. The trade route
from Ladakh to Lhasa passed through
Mount Kailash. Kailash has witnessed all
kinds of people: merchants, spies,
devout pilgrims, and geologists
disguised as pilgrims.
In ancient Indian culture, the world
view was as follows. The center of the
world was called Mount Meru. The four
walls of Mount Meru were symmetrical and
regular in shape, facing the four great
continents of the world: Uttarakuru,
Purvavideha, Jambudvipa, and
Aparagoyania.
This cosmology directly influenced
Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism. When
followers saw Mount Kailash, they
immediately identified it as Mount Meru.
In the Zizong language, it should be
pronounced as Gang Rinpoche.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Leaving the sacred mountain, we headed
to Zanda County. Along the way, we
passed the Khung ruins, which may have
been the capital of the ancient
Shangshung Kingdom. Next, we arrive at
the Dawa ruins. These are the ruins of
an ancient city contemporary with the
Guge Kingdom. We now enter the Zanda
Earth Forest National Geological Park to
begin an exploration of an ancient lake
bed. Combining published academic
papers, we know that a massive ancient
lake once existed here. At the edge of
the earth forests, the level bed of the
former great lake can still be seen.
Below the lake bed is a sedimentary
layer approximately 700 m thick. The
erosion of this sedimentary layer by
water formed the earth forests. Beneath
this 700 m layer lie rocks from hundreds
of millions of years ago. It is often
difficult to describe a lake accurately
with words alone, as the thickness of
the sedimentary layer varies at every
location. The basement rock beneath the
sedimentary layers dates from the
Jurassic to the Cretaceous periods.
Geological research is an ongoing
incremental process. Perhaps in 10
years, new expeditions will overturn
some of our current conclusions.
Therefore, for in-depth study, one must
consult the latest academic papers.
Researchers are still studying how the
Great Sand Lake formed, why it
disappeared, and its relation to the
plateau's uplift. The earth forests were
formed by rainwater erosion. Though
seemingly chaotic, one can identify the
contour lines of the same strata.
Smaller earth forests are nested within
larger ones. A geometric phenomenon
known as a fractal is a fascinating
natural occurrence.
The ground where Tibetan wild asses
kiang now run was once the bottom of the
lake. The Tibetan wild ass is a species
unique to the Qinghai-Zizang Plateau and
is reproductively isolated from common
donkeys. A herd of blue sheep bharal
also lives nearby. Of course, I also
encountered the Tibetan gazelle goat,
the Tibetan wild ass, blue sheep, and
Tibetan gazelle are all endemic species
of the plateau. During the uplift of the
Qinghai-Zizang Plateau, many animals and
plants went extinct.
Numerous animal fossils and ancient
marine fossils have been found in the
Zanda Basin. In the distance, the snow
mountain with a rounded summit is Mount
Kamet, located in India with an altitude
of 7,756
m. At the beginning of our video, in
Peach Blossom Valley, we mentioned a
Sherpa. This Sherpa accompanied the
gorilla leader Ronald Kolbeck on the
Selween Expedition. His name was Lua,
and in 1931,
he completed the first human ascent of
Mount Kamet without supplemental oxygen.
Those who have visited Ngari know that
the Zanda Basin is extremely desolate.
The Himalayas here are not well known,
and they receive far less attention than
the Everest region. However, the
civilizations behind these snow
mountains are different. Has anyone
wondered about the origin of the name
Himalaya? The name comes from Sanskrit,
behind the snow mountains. Mount Kamet
belongs to the western section of the
Himalayas. The snow mountains
nurtured Indian civilization. Ancient
India also included modern-day Pakistan.
The fertile lands depend on the
nourishment of Himalayan meltwater. Snow
mountains hold a significant position in
India. In ancient times, looking north
from the Indian subcontinent at the
Himalayas, people believed this was the
home of the gods. They meditated on
models of sacred mountains and lakes,
which ultimately corresponded to the
lands of Ngari.
During the Age of Discovery, Portugal
invaded India and occupied Goa. In 1624,
a Portuguese missionary crossed the
Himalayas to reach the Guge Kingdom.
This priest was named Antonio de
Andrade. He built the first Catholic
church in Zezong. Sopar Ang. Ultimately,
this intensified internal strife in Guge
and led to an invasion by the external
enemy Ladakh, resulting in the downfall
of the Guge Kingdom. Andrade was not the
first foreigner to reach Guge. 600 years
before him, the great Indian master
Atisha entered Zezong via Guge. He was
invited to the Guge Kingdom to propagate
Buddhist teachings. The Guge Kingdom was
never isolated from the world. It
maintained trade with neighboring
countries. The Himalayan passes that we
cannot approach today were busy trade
routes in ancient times. In the past, if
merchants from Kashgar wanted to come to
Lhasa, there was a mature trade route
crossing the Kunlun Mountains to Ladakh,
and from Ladakh to Shiquanhe. Some
Yarkand merchants even reached Ladakh,
then headed south to India to take a
boat to Mecca for pilgrimage. These are
all recorded in history, allowing us to
understand the world through the ages.
There is a new road from the Guge
Kingdom along the Langqên Zangbo. The
altitude of this road continually drops.
We descend from the lake sedimentary
layers to the basement rock strata. The
Earth Forest is the lake sedimentary
layer. The basement rock consists of
sedimentary rocks from the ancient
ocean. The highway in the video sits
right on the contact surface between the
two. This road leads to a place in
Angare that produces apples to the
township. The rest of the journey is the
Jurassic geological highway. Along the
way are spectacular folds of sedimentary
rock. The deep incision of the river
valley allows us to glimpse the Earth's
rock layers. These sedimentary rocks are
predominantly from the Jurassic period.
Unfortunately, I only took a few photos
with my phone at the time and did not
capture aerial footage.
There is a fork on this sedimentary
highway that leads to Sarong township.
In Riba village of Sarong township,
there is a stone gate. If you trek to
the top of the stone gate,
congratulations.
You will find fossils from the Jurassic
era along the way. This is a marine
fossil I found while trekking an
ammonite. Because the fossils were
exposed on the surface, I initially
thought they were screws. After picking
them up, I realized they were fossils.
These marine creatures lived during the
same period as dinosaurs and are now
extinct. Mr. Wong explained that this
stone gate geologically belongs to the
Jurassic period. Therefore, I like to
call this stone gate the Jurassic gate.
>> [music]
[music]
>> On a certain hilltop west of Zanda
County, I take one last look at the
Himalayas. The Himalayas haven't ended,
but they are no longer accessible
because India illegally occupies Ladakh
on the northern side of the Himalayas.
Continuing our border journey, we arrive
at Pangong. So, the southern shore of
Pangong Tso belongs to the Gangdise
Range, while the northern shore belongs
to the Karakoram Range. These videos
were filmed many years ago. Now, aerial
photography is strictly prohibited in
the Pangong Tso area. In 2020, through a
friend's introduction, I visited the
Jangthang Glacier. This area already
belongs to the Karakoram Range. The
Jangthang Glacier has a pristine ice
tongue. The front of the ice tongue is
near 5,400
m. At such a high altitude, small
flowers can still be seen in summer.
Leaving the Karakoram Range, we arrive
at Changthang. This area is located near
Bangda Tso. Both Sven Hedin and the
Dunhuang thief, Aurel Stein, once
visited this place. By the lake shore,
we encounter several wild yaks. The yak
is a species unique to the plateau.
There are approximately tens of
thousands of wild yaks in nature.
Compared to the domesticated yaks in
Zizang, wild yaks are remarkably robust.
Even though domesticated yaks have a
more stable supply of food and shelter,
they're becoming increasingly weak. In
biology, this phenomenon is known as
domestication syndrome. Parents watching
this, please remember, you must let your
children roam in the wild. Do not keep
them caged indoors. Yaks have 60
chromosomes, as do the cattle of the
plains. However, they are not the same
species. They can crossbreed, but the
resulting male offspring are sterile.
These hybrid cattle are called Dzo.
During his expeditions in eastern
Zezang, Kingdon-Ward recorded these
hybrid cattle. Today,
we often see these Dzos in low-altitude
areas like Naqu. Their appearance is
somewhere between a cow and a yak.
However, when female Dzos continue to
breed with male yaks, after several
generations, the male calves can regain
their fertility, which is quite
fascinating.
Continuing forward, we arrive at the
Guliya Ice Cap in the western Kunlun
Mountains. The Guliya Ice Cap is a dry
continental glacier, so its ablation is
slow. It was generally believed that
China's oldest glacier was located here.
In 1992,
a bottom-reaching ice core was drilled
from the glacier. Isotope dating at the
time showed the bottom of the Guliya Ice
Cap was 700,000 years old. However, with
the development of dating technology,
skepticism followed. Using the latest
technology on glaciers surrounding
Guliya, researchers found that none
predated the last glacial maximum,
roughly 10,000 to 20,000 years ago.
Subsequently, in 2015 and 2021,
the Guliya Ice Cap was redrilled for new
ice cores. The new dating results were
published in the journal Science
Advances in 2025. The author is
Professor Hoshugi. The new data refutes
the dating conclusions from the 1990s.
The Guliya Ice Cap actually formed
during the Holocene, roughly 10,000 to
30,000 years ago. For detailed data,
refer to the aforementioned article. The
age of almost all glaciers in Zezang is
essentially limited to the Holocene, not
to mention those maritime glaciers in
eastern Zezai. So, if you see a blogger
pointing at a glacier and calling it
billions of years old, they are
certainly talking nonsense. Scientists
also extracted over 1,700
types of viral fragments from the Guliya
ice core. Most are ancient viruses, but
there is no need to fear. They are no
longer active." Bidding farewell to the
Guliya ice cap,
we head eastward, the vicinity of Heishi
Baihu North Black Rock Lake. There are
vast expanses of volcanic rock here.
Traveling along National Highway 216,
you can see broken black volcanic rocks
by the roadside. Unweathered volcanic
rocks form these flat-topped mountains.
Since volcanic rock is impermeable, many
small puddles have formed.
In 2022,
during my first trip from Geze to
Minfeng, I encountered a magnificent
herd of Tibetan antelopes. In the years
since, I haven't seen such large herds
again. They have migrated deep into the
Changtang, far from human presence, to
obtain Tibetan antelope cashmere for
making shahtoosh shawls. Large-scale
poaching occurred in the last century.
Among those who fought to stop this
massacre, besides Sonam Dargye, Dr.
George Schaller is also worthy of
remembrance.
Next, we arrive at the middle route of
Ngari. This is Rinchin. Though there are
many lakes in northern Zezong, they
often share similar characteristics.
Unfortunately, I didn't encounter good
weather for the ones worth introducing.
This is Zabuye Salt Lake, a rare natural
lithium carbonate salt lake. The brine
undergoes evaporation and
crystallization, then is purified to
obtain industrial grade lithium
carbonate. Battery manufacturers like
BYD and CATL hold direct or indirect
stakes here. The only drawback of Zabuye
Salt Lake is that its reserves and
output are too small. Our battery
manufacturers still rely primarily on
imports.
Continuing along the Ngari middle route,
we arrive at Zari Namtso. By the lake,
there is a crescent-shaped bay
resembling a bird's beak, known in
geomorphology
as a spit. Near the spit is an attached
lake. In an ocean setting, such a lake
is called a lagoon. But, can an attached
lake in an inland setting be called a
lagoon? I asked Doubao AI, and it said
it is a lagoon. I asked Google, and
Google said it is not. I copied Google's
result to Doubao, and Doubao immediately
changed its mind. I copied Doubao's
result to Google, and Google changed its
mind, too. The core issue is the
definition of a lagoon. Different people
and organizations provide different
definitions. Some say the outer water
body must be an ocean. Others say any
body of water will suffice. Such
ambiguous definitions are common in
geology and geomorphology.
So, sometimes it's best not to overthink
the details, but you can certainly
explore the spit. There is a
thought-provoking question. When we look
forward, our position seems wide, while
the tip looks narrow. But, when we look
back, the widths appear completely
different. It's just like how people
tend to magnify what is near and
diminish what is far. Many feel their
talents are unrecognized,
but they are actually overestimating
themselves.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We circle the lake, the straw hat
mountain, where the ancient shoreline
forms the brim. Continuing around, we
reach the northern shore. In November
2014,
I came here while riding my motorcycle
around China. It was already night, and
due to confusing navigation, feeling
like ghosts were blocking the way, I
spent an unforgettable night camping by
the lake.
Continuing the loop, there are several
large birds. We often see these birds in
Zezong, and many call them vultures. In
fact, they are Himalayan vultures,
Himalayan griffins.
True vultures are rare in Zizai. The
Himalayan vulture may look ferocious,
but the opposite is true. It is heavy
and clumsy, unable even to catch a
mouse. It never attacks other animals
and almost never eats live prey. Born
for the environment, it feeds
exclusively on carrion. Despite its
massive size, the Himalayan vulture can
fly at great altitudes.
Continuing the loop, the composite
landform of spits and lagoons appears
again.
>> [music]
[music]
>> In another satellite lake, red objects
are suspended in the water. Whether they
are algae or silt remains unknown. The
grasslands around Zari Namtso are home
to a large number of Tibetan wild asses,
kiang. Although the kiang is still a
class one protected species, it will
surely be downgraded in the next update.
They are becoming overpopulated in Ze
Zang, especially on the western
grasslands. They compete with livestock
for pasture and they have almost no
natural predators in the wild. The kiang
is a very joyful animal. It is not
aggressive and occasionally even races
against cars. Finally, we switch to
another great lake, Tanggula Yumco. We
continue our journey clockwise around
the lake. We already know that Tanggula
Yumco is the deepest and bluest lake in
Ze Zanga. The salinity of the water is
quite hot.
In summer, the vegetation along the
shore turns green, losing its
desolation. Highland barley is grown by
the lake. Its English name is barley.
Indeed, Highland barley is a type of
barley. The eastern shoreline of Tangra
Yumco is even more beautiful, as this is
a stronghold of the Bon religion.
Perhaps we should be circling the lake
counterclockwise.
>> [music]
[music]
>> On the southern shore of Tangra Yumco,
stands the Dege Snow Mountain. Distant
relatives of the Siberian husky appear.
They are wolves. Today, all dogs on
Earth belong to the wolf species. They
share highly consistent genes and are
the same species. They can interbreed.
This is because dogs are domesticated
wolves. However, wild wolves and
domesticated dogs have developed
significant differences in behavior.
Wild wolves are generally monogamous,
while a city husky with plenty of food
and shelter might have many partners. It
is generally believed that the genetic
gap between dogs and wolves is widening.
In tens of thousands of years, this
difference might grow to the point where
chromosomes no longer align, eventually
evolving into two separate species, much
like yaks and common cattle. After
Tangra Yumco, we arrive at a glacier in
Nyima County. Netizens called us the
Coq's Paw Glacier, which is very
fitting. Due to nature reserve policies,
I have never visited the Purogangri Ice
Field, so I can only visit this budget
version of a glacier. Glaciers are a
vital part of the Changtang ecosystem.
Meltwater forms freshwater rivers,
providing water for wildlife. There are
many wild animals along the way.
Continuing east, we reach the Siling So
water system. This lake is called
Kyaring Tso, with a channel leading to
Siling Tso. And this lake is called Qu
which also has a channel leading to
Siling Tso. A single unified great lake
once existed here, covering both Siling
Tso and Kyaring Tso. One method of lake
research is excavating lake bed
sedimentary layers. These layers can
reconstruct historical climates and
ancient life forms. Lake bed sediment
has been excavated at Qu. The larger
lakes in northern Xizang have been
studied in depth. Research on fossils in
the Changtang confirms that northern
Xizang was once a tropical rainforest.
There has been human activity near Qu
since 40,000 years ago. The Noy site
is nearby, where a large number of stone
tools were discovered. We won't delve
too deeply into that. Now, let's circle
Siling Tso. This small island is near
the geometric center of Siling Tso. At
the beginning of this century, Siling
Tso's area suddenly exploded, making it
the largest lake in Xizang. The reason
was rising water levels that submerged
the shallow sandbars seen in the
footage, swallowing up the satellite
lakes. Many ridges on the northwestern
shore of Siling Tso are rugged and
craggy. Numerous blue sheep bharal live
here. One winter, I saw a blue sheep
drinking at the river. However, my
favorite part of Siling Tso is here, the
Kachin Archipelago. This is a chain of
islands, and the one I am on is the
smallest. How can one get to the island?
The answer is by rowing. Let's look at
the full view of the Kachin Archipelago.
The island I just stepped onto is that
tiny dot in the middle.
>> [music]
[music]
[singing]
>> Here is a question for everyone. Siling,
so is salt water. So is the ice. It
forms in winter salty. We usually assume
that freezing squeezes out the salt.
However, I tasted it in winter and the
ice was still salty. Winter winds and
waves push the ice onto the shore piling
it into small hills leaving Siling Tso.
We had to Namtso. If you ask me which of
Zizang's many large lakes has the best
scenery, I still believe it is Namtso
despite its heavy commercialization.
>> [music]
>> Namtso is backed by snow mountains. So
its best views are concentrated on the
northern shore. The sacred elephant
gate, Shang Shung Tiamen, and the three
sacred stones are all located there. My
favorite spot at Namtso is actually
here. On the map, this hilltop is called
Engo Bakar. In 2017, I first arrived
here on my motorcycle and captured
aerial footage of the spectacular
sandbars and peninsulas. Namtso is a
vital subject for scientific research on
the Qinghai-Zizang Plateau. The deepest
part of Namtso exceeds 100 m. The
scientific expedition team built a
drilling platform on the lake. They have
already drilled through 510 m of
sedimentary layers without yet reaching
the bedrock. This means the lake bed
sediment exceeds 510 m in thickness.
These sedimentary layers act as an
ancient notebook from which information
about prehistoric climates can be
extracted. In comparison, the Zanda
Earth Forest is also composed of
sedimentary layers, which are easier to
sample for study. The reefs near Ong Ba
Cong Long are rugged and prominent.
Internet users call this place Horseshoe
Island.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Numerous blue sheep burrow up here.
I didn't catch the blue sheep on camera,
but I did photograph a certain bird.
This is an extremely rare raptor of the
Plateau's Bearded Vulture Lammergeier.
There are only about 1,000 of them left
in China and only around 10,000
worldwide. Bearded vultures breed very
slowly. This bird possesses a unique
special skill. It feeds on animal bones.
Its nest is located right on the cliff
face. Let's visit its bedroom, which is
lined with sheep wool and Hada
ceremonial scarves snatched from the
mountain tops. Ong Ba Cong Long also
serves as a pasture for local herders.
This concludes our introduction to
Namtso. Let's take a look at the full
panorama of Ong Ba Cong Long.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Next, we arrive at the Madaka Wetlands
in Nagchu. The small puddles scattered
across the wetland resemble the sea of
stars, Xingxiu Hai, at the source of the
Yellow River. Steeds traversing the
wetland look like tissue cells viewed
under a microscope.
Next, we head to Punang Valley in Lhari
County. At the end of the valley is a
glacial lake. There are two mountains
nearby with regular shapes. The higher
one is Mount Karchu. Our journey then
takes us to the Yiga Glacier in Nayu
Township. At the beginning of this
video, we mentioned how Ward traveled
through the Yigong Canyon to Nayu. After
arriving in Nayu, Ward surveyed the Yiga
Glacier. That was on August 20th, 1935.
At that time, the ice tongue of the Yiga
Glacier reached the bottom of the
canyon, according to his travelogue.
Today, the glacier has retreated by a
vertical distance of over 300 m. Next to
the Yiga Glacier is the Jiayang Glacier.
In 2020, the Jiayang Tso glacial lake
breached, triggering a downstream flood.
The bedrock beneath the Yiga Glacier is
granite. The hard granite has resisted
glacial erosion. Ward's early
photographs have become vital
references. For example, research on the
Aza Glacier in Zayu used Ward's glacier
photos to assess the extent of glacial
shrinkage. I couldn't find his photos of
Yiga, only his written descriptions.
>> [music]
[music]
>> At the top of the Yiga Glacier is a
pointed snow mountain called Chokiba. On
the right side of the screen is a
valley, which is also an ancient trail.
Ward took this path, crossing the Luak
in La Pass to reach the Kongpo Gyanda
region. The Yiga Glacier area is densely
packed with snow mountains. There is an
unremarkable peak called Changdazi.
Evidently, it looks better from a ground
perspective. Our journey continues
through Bambar County, Biru County,
Tanken County, and Chamdo City. In the
valleys of Gunling Township, there are
two glaciers. The glaciers exhibit
distinct wavy layers. These are called
glacier ogives, similar to the growth
rings of a tree.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Near Jinling Township, I again
photographed blue sheep. Although I
encountered them on the Zanda
Grasslands, they primarily stay in the
mountains.
>> [music]
[music]
>> This is the Jonggar Glacier in Banbar
County. In winter, the glacial lake
freezes. A few years ago, one could
enter the glacier. Now, to protect the
glacier, approaching it is prohibited.
In the Luoya Village of Banbar Town,
there is a glacial lake called Renmu.
So, the corresponding glacier is the
Rendui Glacier. When I first came to
explore the ice cave, there were no
footprints at all. This is the largest
ice cave I have encountered in Xizang
over the years, though it is not the
longest.
>> [music]
>> There isn't much more to say about
glaciers. Professional research is quite
dry. So, let me sing a song for you.
>> [music]
[music]
[singing]
>> After the song, we set off again and
arrive at Shiding Township by the
Salween River. Before the liberation,
Shiding Township was established here. A
zhang is equivalent to a county. In the
Peach Blossom Valley segment, we
mentioned the guerrilla leader Ronald
Kaulback. He crossed the mountains from
Peach Blossom Valley and entered the
Salween Basin for mapping. He arrived at
Shiding Township in December 1935.
Kaulback recorded the nearby Tibetan
eared pheasants and the taxation
situation in Shiding Township. He
concluded that it was an area with a
well-developed livestock industry. He
also introduced the salt situation.
Previously, people consumed red salt
from the Lancang River Mekong. The salt
here is the white salt from the Tanggula
Mountains. Kaulback's team conducted an
extremely thorough investigation of the
Salween River. However, when they neared
the source, the expedition was blocked.
The Salween is the most hidden river in
Zizhu. Most people only see it at the 72
turns.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Moving forward, we arrive at the sacred
Mount Sapu. I first came here in the
winter of 2017 when Sapu was already
becoming popular online.
>> [music]
[music]
>> I still believe Sapu looks better in
summer, though the entrance fee is
higher than. Once, I was blocked from
the parking lot by the ticket price, but
I found a surprise instead. A Tibetan
blue bear appeared. The formal name for
this bear is the Tibetan brown bear.
Most bears on the high altitude
grasslands of Zizang are Tibetan brown
bears. They are often active at night
visiting garbage dumps for food. I
tracked this bear and found it flipping
over rocks to lick up ants.
The blind bear of northeast China is the
Asian black bear. The two have the same
number of chromosomes, but their genetic
differences are quite large. They can no
longer interbreed. However, polar bears
and Tibetan brown bears can get a
marriage certificate. This is because
their genetic differences are not yet so
great that they cannot exchange genes.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Bidding farewell to Sap Hu, we arrive at
the Puja Snow Mountain. A news report
about the Puja Snow Mountain in 2016
misled many people. The report claimed
that the Puja Snow Mountain developed a
large number of hanging glaciers.
However, the glaciers there are actually
valley glaciers, not hanging glaciers.
It can only be said that the original
writer was not professional enough. In
China, some geographical misconceptions
are entirely driven by commercial
interests. For instance, the Dangxia in
Zhangjia is not actually a Dangxia
landform. There isn't much else to tell
about the Puja Snow Mountain, so let's
talk about the animal I filmed here, the
Tibetan Sand Fox. The Tibetan Sand Fox
became famous online due to its
perpetually bitter or stoic facial
expression. Their primary food source is
the pikas of the grasslands. In the
wild, Tibetan Sand Foxes are monogamous
and maintain exemplary family units.
Whether among mammals or the animal
kingdom as a whole, monogamous animals
are actually in the minority. Foxes,
wolves, and dogs all belong to the
family Canidae. They share a common
trait, Frequent and persistent urination
for territorial marking.
Moving forward, we arrive at Zhiju
Monastery, a major temple of the Bon
religion in Tengkong County. The oldest
known civilization on the plateau is the
Shangshung civilization.
The Shangshung civilization gave birth
to the indigenous religion, Bon.
Although Bon was impacted by the arrival
of Buddhism, it did not disappear
entirely. The remaining Bon traditions
help us research the Shangshung
civilization. Shangshung had its own
language and a mature writing system.
Due to the rise of the Tubo Empire and
the promotion of the Zizang script after
the plateau's unification, the
Shangshung language gradually vanished
from spoken use, but the script remains.
The academic community generally
believes that the Shangshung script was
influenced by Indian and Central Asian
scripts in its form. However, its
pronunciation may share linguistic roots
with Chinese. Over 200 years ago,
Western scholars, missionaries, and
colonial officials came to the East when
they were simultaneously exposed to
Chinese, Burmese, and the Zizang
language. They noticed similarities in
pronunciation and grammar. This
eventually led to the proposal of the
Sino-Tibetan language family concept.
This illustrates the intricate and
ancient connections between these
civilizations.
Now we arrive at I worked here for a
month in 2016.
In my spare time, I used a Phantom 3 for
aerial photography. Back then, the
resolution of drones was poor. Now the
equipment has been upgraded, but flying
is often restricted. Currently, if
caught flying illegally, one might have
to perform prostrations all the way to
Lhasa to atone. The Za and Ang rivers
converge in Chamdo to become the Lancang
River, Mekong.
By the Lancang River, there is a
thousand-year-old salt field. In ancient
times, salt was a vital necessity of
life. The guerrilla leader Ronald
Colback once consumed the red salt
produced here. Early foreigners entering
Xizang noticed a phenomenon. Many Xizang
people on the plateau suffered from
goiters and large thyroids. We later
learned this was caused by a severe
iodine deficiency on the plateau. Today,
we solve this problem by adding iodine
to edible salt. The roads from Yunnan
into Xizang were both the ancient tea
horse road and the ancient tea salt
road. The salt from Yangying was also a
best-selling commodity. Has anyone
wondered why, despite Yunnan's rich
resources, ancient trade was dominated
by tea? Why was tea so important? We
followed the ancient tea horse road to
Rongwu. This is the Lugu Glacier. The
Lugu Glacier has retreated significantly
over the past decade. Let's compare. I
captured aerial footage in both 2017 and
2018. However, at that time, it was
mainly from a tourist's perspective to
capture the scenery, not a
research-oriented panoramic overview. I
have supplemented the melted areas of
the glacier in the image on the right.
The ice on both sides of the glacier is
melting rapidly. In these seven years, 1
km of the glacier has vanished. As a
very important glacier in Xizang, the
academic community has already studied
Ligu in depth, so I won't repeat the
details. The meltwater from the Ligu
glacier flows into Lake Ranwu. Lake
Ranwu is famous because it sits right by
the national highway. However, compared
to Zizhong as a whole, it can only be
considered average. Our itinerary is as
follows. After arriving in Bomi, we
detour to Medog. Bomi has many clear
days in winter, making it an excellent
season for viewing snow mountains.
We arrive at Galong La, which deserves a
detailed introduction. The zigzag road
on the mountainside is the old Medog
highway. With the tunnel now completed,
Medog is accessible year-round. The
summer and winter scenery of Galong La
are vastly different. As the drone
climbs higher, many snow mountains come
into view. Namcha Barwa reappears.
>> [music]
[music]
>> The old Medog road is closed to
vehicles. Summer is suitable for
trekking. Along the way, there are many
rare plants such as Meconopsis, blue
poppies, Cypripedium Himalaicum, and
Podophyllum hexandrum. After crossing
the pass on the old Medog road, one
reaches the Galwa long heavenly lake.
Snowfall is frequent on the Medog
highway in spring. In nature, it is
relatively rare to find woody plants
that can produce vibrant flowers and
grow very tall. Rhododendrons are such
trees. Outside of the Himalayas and the
Hindu and mountains, most rhododendrons
are small. In Europe, they even grow as
shrubs or creep along the ground.
Consequently, European plant hunters
came to China in a greedy quest to
collect rhododendron seeds. Since
natural sciences started late in China
and the West was at the forefront, these
botanists named these rhododendrons
after themselves. There are many
flowering trees in Medog. One of my
personal favorites is the magnolia. In
late March, we entered Medog from
Galongla. Around the 80K mark, there are
many of these magnolias. Its scientific
name is Magnolia campbellii, the Yunnan
sizing magnolia. The plant hunter, Frank
Kingdon Ward, recorded this species. I
also filmed pink magnolia campbellii on
the Yunnan side of the border.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Following the Medog Highway to the
Wudang Waterfall, the vegetation changes
as the altitude drops. Historically, the
Earth's climate cycles between warm and
cold. When major ice ages arrived, many
animals and plants went extinct.
However, the Medog area, with its
massive elevation drop, was more
inclusive and served as a refuge. This
place is a paradise for flora and fauna.
The second comprehensive scientific
expedition is ongoing, with new species
being discovered every few days. Yet,
the biodiversity in Medog is so rich
that our current research is far from
sufficient. By the Yarlung Tsangpo,
there are several flowering trees that
look like silk cotton trees, bombax, but
upon closer inspection, they are not.
These are likely Erythrina arborescens,
coral trees. A massive honeycomb hangs
from the top of an Erythrina. The
Erythrina arborescens is not a protected
rare tree, nor is that honeycomb a
protected insect. However, I don't
recommend climbing the tree for honey as
the Erythrina is covered in thorns, and
the bees in this type of hive do not
produce honey.
Next, we deviate from the Medog Highway
to head toward Gandeng Township in Upper
Medog. Traveling upstream along the
Yarlung Tsangpo, the road consists
entirely of rugged mountain paths. This
is Gandeng Township. Opposite Gandeng is
Senglong Peak, also known as Gongpalapa.
Whether in the diaries of the spy
Frederick Bailey or the plant hunter
Frank Kingdon-Ward, the name used for
this snow mountain is Senglong. The
winter sunrise illuminates Senglong
Namcha Barwa
and Gyala Peri. This is the starting
point of the Himalayas. The sun rises as
the full moon sets in the west. 100
years ago, in 1924,
Ward traversed the core area of the
Yarlung Tsangpo. 100 years later, the
number of explorers in the Yarlung
Tsangpo core area has not increased.
Instead, there are even fewer. One
reason is that the secrets of the
Yarlung Tsangpo have been largely
revealed. The cost of exploration is
high, while the rewards are few.
Capturing aerial footage of the Yarlung
Tsangpo core area, especially the
Tsangpo Badong Waterfalls, has always
been my long-cherished wish. At the
beginning of our video, we also filmed
to Peri, but that side is too far from
the Great Waterfalls. The ridge
stretching across the front of Gyala
Peri is called Zixing La. La. This is an
excellent vantage point. Though it is
clearly not easy to reach. The sunset
turns red as the day ends. If this
forest has a master, it is undoubtedly
the local Monpa and Lhoba people.
Without the assistance of locals, it is
difficult for outsiders to successfully
traverse this area.
>> [music]
>> This was once the final mist on this
planet. When the drone flies over Zixing
La, the Great Waterfalls will appear.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Due to various reasons, I was unable to
reach the Tsangpo Badong Waterfalls. The
drone only captured the falls without
doing them justice. Our video ends here.
I'll leave you with a panoramic photo of
the Grand Canyon. A few closing words
for those of you who have watched the
entire video. Most animals on our planet
live in the wild. Only humans can find
themselves in cities made of steel and
concrete. When you feel that life is
dull or find yourself in low spirits,
please remember that nature is our
fundamental dojo place of practice.
Please remember to come home.
>> [music]
[music]
[panting and sighs]
[screaming]
[gasps and sighs]
[panting]
[sighs]
>> Mhm.